>> Hello and welcome to
the Haskell Weekly podcast.
This is a show about Haskell, a purely
functional programming language.
I'm your host, Taylor Fausak.
I'm the Director of Software
Engineering at ACI Learning.
I'm very excited to welcome a special
guest onto the podcast this week.
With me today is Vlad,
or Vladislav Zavialov.
Welcome Vlad, thanks for joining me.
>> Hi, I'm very glad to
be a part of this podcast.
>> I'm very glad to have you.
And we were talking earlier
about mispronouncing names.
So could you say your own name, just
so that we got it on the record?
>> Sure.
So my name is Vladislav Zavialov.
It's a Russian name, so no
worries if you don't get right.
I don't worry about it too much myself.
>> All right.
Well, thanks again for joining me.
And for the listeners that haven't heard
of you, how would you describe yourself?
>> So I'm a Haskell developer, and
mostly I'm a self-taught Haskeller.
So I want to make the language
easy for others to learn as well.
And my interest in dependent types
actually started as a way of simplifying
the current Haskell practices.
So the more I tried to develop software
with static guarantees in Haskell, the
more I started using extensions, such
as GADTs, type families, and so on.
And I got burned bad by them.
So if you're not careful with
that, then you end up writing
basically unmaintainable code.
And now I've made my mission to change
Haskell into a language where you
can make — where you can write code
that is simultaneously maintainable
and has good static guarantees.
>> That is a good mission.
And I'm happy that you're working on it.
I've definitely experienced some of
that pain you're talking about, where
as you add more advanced type level
features,  the program gets simultaneously
easier and harder to maintain.
So I'm looking forward to
some — to diving into some of
the talk on dependent Haskell.
But before we get there, I understand
that you work for Serokell, which
is a Haskell company, more or less.
Right?
>> Yeah, exactly.
So I represent the research
division of Serokell.
We have some commercial clients and
we work in the areas of financial
technology and other areas where high
security and correctness are required.
But myself, I mostly work with
my team of four people and we
are focusing on GHC exclusively.
And maybe sometimes we help with
internal products, and the blog, to write
something useful for the public to make
our work more visible and maybe help
others get into this topic, get more
familiar with dependent types in Haskell.
So yeah.
Basically I wanted to praise
my company for giving me this
opportunity because it's basically
my dream job to be working on GHC.
And I get to decide
which tasks to work on.
I have basically complete freedom of
prioritizing what needs to be done in
GHC, as long as I can argue why it helps
us to get closer to dependent types.
>> Yeah, that sounds fantastic.
It's really encouraging to have
a private company with so many
developers working solely on GHC.
I'm merely a consumer.
Me and my company are consumers of GHC.
So we definitely benefit from your work.
So thank you.
And thank your company.
You're both doing great stuff.
So you touched on this already,
but dependent Haskell is an
area that you're interested in.
And as you mentioned, I've seen some
posts on the company blog about that.
Both authored by you and
an interview with you.
So, from an extremely high level,
could you tell us what are dependent
types and more specifically,
what is dependent Haskell?
>> Right.
So dependent types are a
feature of the type system.
And for any given language, you
could say that it either has
them or it doesn't have them.
Haskell is currently in a sort of gray
area where it technically doesn't have
them, but with enough effort and work
arounds, you can get similar expressivity.
That's called Singleton types.
And that's current practice
with GADTs and type families.
So, dependently typed programming
in Haskell is a topic that — well,
many people are trying to do it.
But one of the ways to get into it
is to actually start with an actually
dependently typed language such as Agda
or Coq or Idris, and then try to translate
those concepts back into Haskell and use
the Haskell's awkward encoding of them.
So that's why basically — I want
to add dependent types to Haskell.
To make the encoding, instead of it being
awkward, to make it straightforward.
And the exact description of the
feature, what dependent types are,
basically boils down to two built
in types: sigma types and pi types.
Or dependent sums and dependent products.
So if we could say that Haskell has
those two types, then we say that
Haskell has got dependent types.
And the way to understand that — these
two concepts is that — actually we will
also have user defined dependent types.
And the analogy I would use
is algebraic data types.
So you have Either which represents
usual, non-dependent sums.
And you have tuples which represent
normal non-dependent products.
And you have functions.
And basically when you are defining your
own algebraic data type, you're just using
— you're just doing it for a better API.
You could, in theory, just stack
tuples on top of eithers and do
this like giant nested structure,
where instead of defining like a
data type with five constructors,
you use Either five times nestedly.
Yeah, and that's the same
relationship between dependent
types that will be user definable,
and sigma types, and product types.
So those two are the core concepts.
If you understand them, you basically get
the building blocks for dependent types.
But then it's up to the users to define
their own and apply them — apply the type
system feature to design better APIs.
Now,
I will explain first dependent
sums because they're easier,
and then dependent products.
So dependent sum, you can think of it
as a generalization of normal sums.
So if you think — you can think about
an Either value actually as a pair.
So as the first component you have the
constructor, it's either left or right.
And as the second component, you have
the value attached to it, it's either
the value of one type or the other type.
And in this sense, the first
value in this pair determines
the type of the second value.
So if you have for
example, Either Int Bool.
Then Left in the first component means you
have an Int in the second component and
Right in the first component means that
you have a Bool in the second component.
And this is basically the dependency.
That's how the type of one
value can depend on another.
And product types like this — well,
I mean sum types, dependent sum types
— are a generalization, because instead
of just Left or Right, you can have
arbitrary values in the first component.
So the direct correspondence would
be between Either and a dependent
pair, where the first component is
Bool because you have two values.
It would say that False corresponds
to Left and True corresponds to Right.
And then if you have False, then it's
one type in the second component.
If you have True, it's another
type in your second component.
But it could also be
three possible values,
or four possible values.
And as long as you have a finite
amount of possible values in the first
component, you can actually still model
it as a normal algebraic data types.
But if you have an infinite amount of
possible constructors, if you have an
Int in the first component, then that's
actually — you cannot define an ADT
with an infinite amount of constructors.
And then you would actually
use a dependent pair.
For example, you may want to
define a vector, which is at
least parameterized by its length.
And this length is supposedly
a compile time parameter.
So it's not a part of the structure.
And then you have — then maybe in some
part of the code, you want to produce
a vector that is of unknown length.
For example, the user has
entered it from the keyboard.
Or you have read it from some other
sort of file, or downloaded from
network, and you are trying to write
out this type which is a vector
of ints for example of length N.
But what is N?
We do not know what N is at compile time.
And that's when we would have to
use a dependent pair, we would
say that, okay, here is a pair.
The first  component is some N,
which is  known only at run time.
But then in the second component we
use this N, which is known — which
is a value known only at runtime.
We actually use it as part of the type.
So we say we have a vector of this length.
Length stored in the first component.
But even though it's known only at
runtime, it's still recognized by the
type system as some symbolic value.
And that's basically what
dependent types means.
It means that the compiler in the type
system starts reasoning about values,
which are actually runtime values.
And you get this — the distinction
between types and values blurs.
You basically no longer speak of types
and values as two separate worlds
in which, like, your program lives.
It's no longer two sub languages.
And instead you start talking about the
compile time and runtime phase separation.
So you still know that you have erasure.
And you know that these values will
be passed around, and they will
take memory when your program runs.
And these values are only
during compile time and only the
type system makes use of them.
But you also can mix and match those
two as much as your use case requires.
>> Right.
Okay.
Well, thanks for that
overview of dependent Haskell.
I feel like already, I understand
it better than I did 10 minutes ago.
I especially appreciate the analogy you
drew between kind of the value level
ADTs for either and — eithers and tuples,
versus the type level sigma and pi
types, which are terms I've heard before,
but never really knew what they meant.
So I appreciate that.
I also like drawing the parallel between
the ergonomics of being able to define
your custom types versus building
complex types out of eithers and tuples.
And I think most Haskell programmers
can probably realize that those
two things are isomorphic.
You can convert between them
without losing any information.
But it would be a big pain to always
work with the eithers and tuples.
Using those custom types is very nice.
You also mentioned a couple of things
that I want to dig into a little bit.
So one of the things is that you
noted Haskell is kind of in this
weird middle ground between having
dependent types and not having them.
So what motivated you, or really
the larger community, to want to add
dependent types to Haskell, versus
trying to make another language that
already has them, like, let's say
Idris — you know, bring all the nice
stuff that Haskell has to Idris.
So, so why bring dependent types to
Haskell rather than the other way around?
>> Yeah, so basically the reason for
that is that there is always more than
one feature that defines a language, and
Idris is not Haskell plus dependent types.
It's a different language.
And one of the most notable differences
is that it has strict evaluation.
And it has it by design.
There's no plans to
make it lazy by default.
Which is a fine design choice, but
not the one that I subscribe to.
I want to be writing in a lazy language.
And in this sense, Haskell is very unique.
There are very few other lazy
languages, and the reason for that
is the difficulty of implementation.
Basically our hardware is not meant to
execute lazy programs, and there has
been a very large amount of engineering
effort and insight into developing
STG, the intermediate representation,
the virtual machine,with lazy
evaluation semantics and the backend
that translates it into machine code.
And then the runtime system,
which supports all of that.
And it's basically, in my view, a miracle
that Haskell runs as fast as it does.
And it's got lazy evaluation,
which has all the nice — all the
nice denotational properties.
So when I'm writing code,
I often make use of them.
And if I wanted to have a language
that has dependent types and lazy
evaluation, Haskell is basically the most
practical starting point to get there.
Another one would be to work on the
performance of Agda and make — because
Agda is also a lazy language, by
virtue of compiling to Haskell.
And that I think is also
a very nice thing to have.
But I'm starting from Haskell because I'm
more comfortable with Haskell and I have
a stronger emotional attachment to it.
I've been writing it for so long,
I just want it to get better.
>> Yeah, that makes a lot of sense,
and I can definitely appreciate that
Idris is a completely different language.
And, you know, compiling down to
Haskell maybe isn't the same as having
it a part of GHC in the first place.
That does make me wonder about
related kind of advanced type level
efforts that have been landing in GHC
recently, most notably linear types.
Does dependent Haskell play nicely
with linear types, or are they
completely orthogonal things?
Do they not care about each other at all?
How do they fit together?
>> Oh, they care about
each other very much.
And it's a very difficult research
topic of how to combine them.
And basically there has been a fresh
paper by Richard Eisenberg about using
a formalism which unites dependent
types with linear types as a property
of quantifiers that introduce variables.
But as far as I understand it,
it currently doesn't handle
multiplicity polymorphism.
It's closer to what Idris 2 has.
So in Idris 2, the second version
of Idris, they've also combined
linear types and dependent types.
And every time you write a function you
annotate the — in the type, whether you
can use this function parameter zero
times, one time, or as many as you want.
And zero times corresponds to Haskell's
forall, which means it's erased.
It has parametricity properties
that we care about, and
nice performance properties.
As many as you want is
basically dependent types.
It's a normal function value, which
you can duplicate, ignore, and,
since it's Idris, you can also use
it in the rest of the type signature.
That's pi types, which I've just
realized I've yet to explain.
I only explained the sigma types.
But anyway, and then there is the
one multiplicity annotation, which
means that you've got to use it
exactly once.
And that's  linear types.
And in Haskell, we are looking
towards something very similar.
So we are going to have annotations on
the variables introduced by a function.
But we've also got to worry about
multiplicity polymorphism, which has
that — we actually don't know if this
is a linear or a nonlinear value.
For example, if we are writing the map
function for lists, we would like to say,
in linear types, that if the function
provided by the user that we are applying
to each list element is linear, then the
entire mapping of the list is also linear.
So if F is linear, then map F
is also linear, but if F is not
linear, then map F is not linear.
And in this sense, like, the annotation
on one function arrow determines
the annotation on another, and
that's where you get a multiplicity
variable that's part of linear types.
And the current theory doesn't actually
combine those sort of linearity variables
with dependent Haskell in a nice way.
So we have like a design in which linear
types and dependent types are sort of
separate — entirely separate features.
So if you have like a
dependent quantifier, you can
not use linearity with it.
But so basically that's the design
that was established before linear
types were introduced into Haskell.
And we're roughly following this as our
guideline, or more of a fallback plan.
Like if we don't figure out how to
combine linear types with dependent
types, then we still can get both of them.
They will just not play too nicely,
but there is like a real opportunity
that we will figure it out.
And that those will actually have a very
beautiful interplay between each other.
>> Okay.
So it sounds like it's still a bit
of an open research problem, but
also it sounds like you're hopeful.
And linear types landed in GHC 9.0.
Is there an expectation for when dependent
Haskell may be available to end users?
>> Well, no.
The problem is that with dependent
Haskell there is still some design
questions that need to be resolved.
And that's happening as part
of the GHC proposals process.
So while we have like a general vision
of where we want to get, we don't have
the specifics because the specifics
that were developed as part of the
theory, they were developed in a vacuum.
Like that's the dependent
Haskell that we want.
And then there are a million questions
about backwards compatibility.
Because we don't want to suddenly have,
for example, one namespace for variables.
If you're defining a function, you
can use the same name for a type
variable and the term level variable.
And that will be like entirely
non-problematic currently because we have
two sub languages, entirely separated.
And it doesn't even matter, but
basically there is no direct
interaction between them.
And if you have two things with
the same name, well, no problem.
GHC always knows which one to use.
But if we want types to depend on
values, that suddenly means you
can reference values in your types.
And then it means you can reference
variable names in your types.
And that means that suddenly you
do care about two variables in two
namespaces, which are the same thing.
And it's a very tough balancing act,
how to introduce this and to have
Reasonable error messages, reasonable
user experience, instead of like
unleashing this monster patch
that breaks half of  Hackage.
And yeah, basically it has
terrible error messages.
No, we don't want that.
So the current efforts are more focused
towards figuring out how to integrate
the dependently typed features and the
features that exist in Haskell today.
And then there is also the
engineering work required because
we will need to modify pretty much
every bit of the GHC front-end.
So that includes parsing, that
includes name resolution, and
that includes type checking.
We will also need to modify
the core language to support
dependent quantification.
And the core language is
heavily used by the optimizer.
That's like the representation
on which it operates.
But hopefully we will not
have to change the backend.
So STG and everything  past
that, we will not have to worry
about that, it stays the same.
But the front-end and the
internal language, all of it
requires some sort of update.
There is already existing
work towards that end.
For example, the current
internal representation that
GHC uses is called System FC.
Which means System F with coercions.
There are very nice papers about it.
And there are primitives in it which
are used to represent type level
equalities, which are used to decode
—
basically this is the abstraction
into which current type level
features of Haskell are compiled into.
So type families are
compiled into equalities.
And GADTs are compiled into equalities.
Data families are also compiled
to — using coercions and equalities.
But this is not expressive enough
to represent proper dependent
types — dependent sums and products.
And an alternative formalism
was developed, called System DC.
System D with coercions.
D for dependent, I suppose.
And it's a new system, which is — like
it's, it exists only on paper.
So we will need to rewrite
the very like core of GHC.
The most basic — the most central
representation of Haskell programs,
through which the — every program
basically compiles through core.
We will — we are changing that
to include this new feature.
And that means we will need to very
carefully update the optimizer as well.
And, like, that's tricky engineering work.
And personally, I haven't
even started looking into it.
Like, I'm just observing it from
a distance and focusing on like
the parser and the name resolution
and more user-facing aspects,
more than internal aspect.
That's like beyond my current
capability to tackle these super
technical topics, although I'm
planning to get into it eventually.
I'm just like focusing on things
that I understand right now and
which are equally valuable, I think.
>> Yeah, yeah.
That engineering work does
sound tricky, to put it mildly.
But I'm glad that you're focusing
on the user facing stuff first.
Cause I think, hammering out those
proposals, and figuring out how should
this feature even behave, is really
important before digging into, how
are we going to implement it into GHC?
And I'm actually curious
about that proposal process.
Because I know that you're part of the
GHC steering committee, and that you have
authored many GHC proposals yourself.
And that's not something that we've
discussed on the podcast before.
So could you tell the listeners
a little about the proposal
process and how, you know, what
you do as part of the committee?
>> Yeah, sure.
So the proposal process was conceived
as a way of getting more community
feedback about Haskell features.
Because previously, if you've got someone
who is very motivated and wants to get
something into Haskell, they talk to
Simon and they get it into Haskell.
But then it was decided that maybe
we are now a mature language which
needs — which needs a proper process,
and representatives from industry,
from education, and from research
areas to express their views.
Do they actually want this feature?
Or maybe they want it, but
they want it to be different.
And that's how the GHC
steering committee's compiled.
From people who represent as
diverse as possible areas.
And then there's also community feedback.
So anyone who cares about Haskell
can comment on any proposal
with constructive feedback.
Or even just to support it, or say
that it like — it looks very difficult,
please change something
about its user experience.
Every comment is fair game, as
long as it helps the proposal
author to modify his proposal.
And the process is that, there is
also — there is always a person who
must have enough time and resources
to push the proposal forward.
So they've got this idea
and they've got to develop
the design for this feature.
They've got to write a convincing
motivation, convincing to everyone,
both the committee and the community.
They've got to research how this
feature will affect the ecosystem.
So they've got to describe:
Will it cause breakage?
How much breakage?
If it does, do we want
a migration strategy?
So that's — and that's  basically
the sections of the proposal.
First you've got motivation, then
the proposed change specification,
and then effects and interactions.
And you've got to describe all of that.
And hopefully if it's convincing,
you submit it to the — you first
discuss it with the community,
the committee is involved later.
You got the feedback, you incorporate
it into your proposal, and when you
basically get no comments from the
community for two weeks or something,
you decide, okay, it's time.
I'm submitting it.
You ping the secretary, who relays
your proposal to the committee's
mailing list, which is also open.
Everybody can subscribe to
it and see the deliberations.
It's nothing secret.
Nothing behind the curtain,
everything is in the open.
So you can see what the committee
members think about this proposal,
and their reasoning for either
accepting it or sending it back.
You don't have to follow the
committee's deliberations, because
in the end you get a report.
Basically we either accept it,
or we say, you first need to
change this, that and that.
And after some back and forth with
the author, hopefully we get to some
sort of conclusion whether this is the
future that we want for Haskell or not.
And then once it gets accepted to
the GHC proposals repository, it's
waiting for someone to implement it.
So maybe if somebody wants to contribute
to Haskell and they don't know where to
start, this person could go through the
list of accepted, but not implemented
proposals and think — think through
if any of those proposals appeals
to them and looks implementable.
Maybe they could drop the author
of this proposal a message, to
ask for advice for implementation,
and basically start hacking.
I've got like this page, GHC.dev,
which helps you set up an
environment and start working on GHC.
But I suppose we can discuss it later.
>> Sure, yeah.
Thank you for sharing the
proposal process and your role
and the committee's role in it.
I do want to come back to GHC.dev
later, but suffice to say, it's
a valuable resource for getting
started with GHC development.
And as you mentioned, if anyone is
interested in making a new proposal or
implementing a proposal, that website
should be able to help you out with that.
But you mentioned something earlier that
I want to loop back on, which is, for
dependent types you had described what a
sigma type is, but not what a pi type is.
And you said you wanted
to tell us what that is.
So could you tell us now?
>> Oh right, exactly.
So the sigma types are dependent
sums and they generalize Either.
And in the same manner, pi types
are dependent product types
and they generalize tuples.
So with the pi type, in order to
understand it first, you need to
think about tuples as functions.
And the isomorphism of tuples
as functions works as … you
can think about it as follows.
So if you have a tuple of two
elements, that's basically a
function taking a Bool as input.
If you — if you pass it True
you get the first component.
If you pass it False you
get the second component.
But in current Haskell you can — you
can only use this encoding if both
components have the same type.
And in dependent Haskell, you can
actually encode the tuple as a pi type
by saying, if you pass True to this
function, you will get value of one type.
If you get — if you pass False to
it, you get a value of another type.
So dependent function is a function
such that you don't know the result
type of this function until you
know what value it was applied to.
And back to this example with vectors.
Maybe you have a function replicate.
And on lists you have the replicate
function, which takes an integer, then
takes some value, and gives you a list
with this value repeated this N times.
But if you've got the length of the list,
in the type, you would say, okay, so
replicate on vectors takes an int, then
it takes a value, and it produces a vector
of N — a vector of values of length N.
But what is N?
N is the value that we passed in.
So we don't — so we know the
general shape of the return type.
We know it's a vector, and we know the
type of its elements, but we don't know
its length because the length actually
is referencing the runtime value.
And the reason it's called a dependent
product is basically you can think about
it as a giant tuple where … so … and
since we are dependent on an integer.
It means that, the first component of a
tuple is when we have run replicate zero,
and we've got an empty vector there.
The second component is
a vector of one element.
Then the third component, a
vector of two elements, then
three elements, four elements.
When you are invoking this function,
you're accessing the Nth component of
this infinite tuple and that's like
the mathematical abstraction behind it.
Of course, at runtime
there will be no tuples.
There will be just functions.
But that, like — that's the intuition
behind why it's called a product
type, even though it's a function.
Similarly a dependent sum, is actually
a product in the — in the usual sense
because you have the first component and
second component, but it's called the sum
because it generalizes the normal sums.
And it's easy to get confused with it,
but only because of the terminology.
Actually the concepts themselves
are not that confusing.
>> Yeah.
Again, thank you for explaining.
And I feel like I
understand it even better.
And having these, you know, analogies
helps me wrap my head around them.
Because again, I've heard of sigma
and pi types before, but never
really understood what they meant.
And now I understand why they're
not called, you know, dependent
sums or dependent products.
Because while they can model
those things, maybe that's not
the best way to think about them.
Or that's not how they're
actually implemented.
>> Wait, wait.
Maybe I wasn't clear enough, but
sigma types are dependent sums, and
pi types are dependent products.
So that's — those are synonymous.
>> Right.
But also you said that the, sum types
are implemented as tuples, right?
And the tuples are
implemented as functions.
>> Yeah, yeah.
Okay, yeah.
So you — you've got like, internally to
represent a dependent sum you actually
have a pair, and to represent a dependent
product you actually have a function.
So you've got like, to — to up
the — to have the more expressive,
like, more general type to
represent a less expressive type,
in order to add dependence to it.
>> Right.
So a little tricky, but I
feel like I'm getting it.
That reminds me of a maybe similar
effort, which other people may be
familiar with, of Liquid Haskell.
And I understand that that's refinement
types, which are different than dependent
types, but it seems to me like there's
a significant amount of overlap there.
But I do understand
that they are different.
Can you explain what the differences
between, you know, the current
implementation of Liquid Haskell and what
may be in the future dependent Haskell?
>> Yes.
So, liquid Haskell is also
— refinement types are basically a
limited form of dependent types.
Why?
Because you are referencing value
level variables in your types.
You are saying that — when you're taking,
for example, you could assert using
Liquid Haskell that when you sort a
list, this list is of the same length.
So in the return type of your — of your
function, you can reference the length
of the input type using refinement types.
And this is in fact dependence, but
unlike full-blown dependent types where
you've got sigma and pi types, you
can only use annotations like this.
And this basically means two things.
First, for the use cases that — where
refinement types are applicable,
they've got better ergonomics.
So whenever it's possible, I
would rather use refinement
types over raw dependent types.
Because it's this, like — the same
thing we've discussed with, using
your — user defined data type or
encoding everything using primitives?
Yeah.
So dependent types that are introduced
as part of dependent Haskell,
they're a more primitive notion.
While refinement types are imagined
as a more user — like closer to
what users will want to write.
But that also means that we will
— we'll be able to combine them.
And eventually Liquid Haskell
can be built on top of dependent
Haskell as an extension to it.
Which basically adds SMT solving.
So every proof in dependent Haskell,
you would have to write by hand.
And if you want to convince the
compiler that for example, addition
commutes, you will have to go through
the first argument of your addition and
structurally recurse over it, and then
prove associativity or commutativity
or whatever property you care about.
While with refinement types,
you're relying on an SMT solver
to do all the proving for you.
And that also means that with refinement
types when it works, it's nicer because
you didn't have to write out the proofs.
But when it doesn't work, you're stuck.
You either get the SMT solver to do
it for you or it's a lost situation.
Whereas with dependent types,
you just think harder and
write a more complex proof.
>> Okay.
Thanks for explaining.
It sounds like refinement types, as
implemented by Liquid Haskell, are
a limited subset of dependent types.
And they may play nicely
together in the future.
>> Yes, definitely.
And my only gripe with Liquid
Haskell is that it's a separate tool.
So it lags a little bit behind
like the latest version of GHC.
And if GHC shipped refinement types
in its standard distribution, I would
be a huge proponent of this feature
and I would be trying to use it
like in as much places as possible.
As many places — as
many places as possible.
Yes.
>> Yeah.
So, I think, you mentioned
earlier the website you created
for getting GHC developers kind
of onboarded and up and running.
Could you tell us more about that?
>> Yeah, so basically we
snatched the domain GHC.dev.
And I tried to think of something
that would be fit for this domain.
And I decided that it's got to
be a page about GHC development.
And I've got like, these huge grandiose
ideas about writing a blog post there
with the news about GHC development.
And maybe some computed stats
about contributions, who is the
top contributor, what they're
working on, and stuff like that.
And the — and I would just start
with the instructions, how somebody
could — somebody could get hacking,
and participate in GHC development.
But as it happens, like
that's where it's ended.
So I've got this static page, but
I've also had a lot of people tell me
that they found it extremely useful.
And it was like the only steps
they could find online that
worked for them to build GHC.
So basically it's a very small
page that's got 10 or so sections.
And it says like, for documentation
go here, for downloading go
here, for building go here.
Here are two commands
to test your program.
Here are two commands to run GHC
in debug mode to figure out what's
wrong with your patch, and so on.
And I made sure that every
command on this page is copyable.
So it's a cheat sheet that
I use myself frequently.
So GHC, it's got this — an
unfortunate, in my opinion, decision.
It uses sub-modules.
And it makes Git really flaky.
And when I try to change branches,
it sometimes just tells me no.
So my approach to development is to have
a separate GHC copy — GHC repository copy
for each of the features I'm working on.
And I — that means I frequently
need to build from scratch.
So I think, okay I need to
work on yet another feature,
I'm building from scratch.
And I go to this GHC.dev and
start copying stuff from there.
So I'm not proud of that one, but it
also means that others get to copy
paste as well, which I guess is great.
>> Yeah.
No, that is great.
And I like that you use it yourself
routinely because that means these
commands are likely to continue
to work moving into the future.
Because I know one problem, not just
with Haskell documentation, but pretty
much any documentation, is that they
may have been accurate at the time
they were written, but things change.
And the fact that you continue
to use it means that hopefully if
one of those commands doesn't work
for you, you'll go and update it.
>> Yeah, definitely.
And by the way, it's — I also wanted
this page to be as small as possible.
So, I mean in terms of download time.
And I wrote it in Haskell.
So it attests to the existence of CSS
and the HTML libraries for Haskell.
So I didn't use some — so I started
thinking about writing like raw HTML and
CSS and using some sort of Webpack or
whatever other [JS] tool is currently the
favorite one in the — in the JS community.
And I like, couldn't get the
result I wanted from any of them.
They keep — they kept inserting
things that I didn't actually
want in my end product.
And I decided: screw it,
I'll write it with Haskell.
And that was like the best decision.
So Haskell is — turns out it's like a
good DSL, not only for web services, where
you need to generate things dynamically,
but also if you need a simple static
page, Haskell also comes in handy.
>> Yeah, I agree.
The Haskell Weekly website itself
is generated or served with Haskell.
It used to be generated now it's served.
So yeah, if any of the listeners are
interested in contributing to GHC,
I would recommend going to GHC.dev
and seeing Vlad's copy pasteable
commands there to get started.
So Vlad, we've covered
a lot of ground here.
And we've talked a lot about dependent
Haskell, and your contributions
via the proposal process, and
the committee, and this website.
Is there anything else that
I haven't asked you about
that you want to talk about?
>> Yeah, I guess you have like a
better sense of what the listeners of the
podcast would be interested in hearing.
So like I'm open to any questions,
professional and personal.
So fire away.
>> Well, I think we've covered
most of the things — I have been
taking notes through this whole thing.
One thing you mentioned at the start
of the episode that I wanted to get a
little more clarity on was: you mentioned
actually simplifying things with dependent
types, which was intriguing to me, because
dependent types themselves feel like a
very advanced feature, but it does seem
like you can use that advanced feature
to make your implementation simpler,
easier to understand, or have fewer bugs.
Could you expand on that?
>> Yeah.
So basically it wouldn't be a
simplification of the current
best practices for Haskell.
Because current best practices, in my
opinion, is to avoid type level features.
Cause it's a rabbit hole.
And as soon as you start using
them, you need more and more.
Because if you like stick to types where
not many type parameters are involved,
sometimes you just throw runtime errors
and like you continue development.
And sometimes it shows up in tests and you
have to debug it, but like that's life.
Even with dependent types, you will not
prove every property of your program
and you will have runtime failures.
And if you want to statically
guarantee that everything about your
program is correct, currently Haskell
isn't the right language for that.
But there is like this gray area
where you start — where you're trying
to get as far as possible with the
features that GHC currently provides.
And you first start by enabling GADTs.
And when you enable GADTs,
you get these type indices.
And some — and sometimes to compute
the type index of some return type,
you need to do some computation on
the type indices of the input type.
And you start writing closed type
families in order to do that.
Because that's the current practice
for writing what would be a term
level function, but on the type level.
And once you get into type families,
you are writing in a language
with no evaluation semantics.
It's not a lazy and not a strict language.
It's like,
whatever-the-type-checker-wants-to-do
language.
And it means that if you write a
sort that in terms would have one
asymptotic complexity, let's say — let's
say it's a quadratic sort, maybe
you're bad at algorithms, but — oh!
But maybe you are not bad at algorithms.
Maybe it's just that the features of
type families are so annoying to use
that you just write the minimum amount
of code possible to get it to compile.
Because you don't even have
like first class case analysis.
You don't have lambdas.
You don't have any of that.
Anyway, you write your sorting
algorithm and you are thinking to
yourself, well, maybe it's not the
best algorithm, but it's got to
work in a reasonable amount of time.
But it will not finish compiling
until the end of universe because in
branches that should not be computed,
it actually computes them all.
And if you have like a condition if,
and it evaluates — the conditional
evaluated to true, the type checker
will decide to evaluate both
branches, both then and false.
And as soon as you get something
recursive, like it's, hopeless.
I mean, it might change
the — its asymptotics with the
minor compiler version update.
So type families: a great tool in
a very limited amount of use cases.
And I would say the use cases where you
are not defining recursive type families.
So if you just have like flat instances,
associating one type to another
without complex computation, then type
families are like ready for prime time.
Use it in production.
But as soon as you start doing it, it's
very easy to slip, and start writing just
a little bit of recursive type families.
And maybe like it works in this
limited amount of circumstances, but
then you're — for example, you're
processing a small type level list.
It used to have five elements, but
now it has six, and now has 10.
And with the bad asymptotics, by the
time it gets to 12 elements, uh-oh.
We actually had this problem,
that we needed 80 gigabytes
of RAM to compile our project.
Yeah, and we could only use it — we could
only do it on our CI machine and locally
we had to put some unsafe coerces here
and there just to get it to shut up.
Yeah, so that wasn't a pleasant experience
and I'm hoping that all of that will
like go away with dependent Haskell.
And one of the things that we are
planning is that you would be able
to use term level functions at
the type level, and they will have
term level evaluation semantics.
Which means that you get lazy evaluation.
You get reasonable asymptotic behavior.
Maybe we could even, on platforms
that support dynamic linking,
maybe we could load the dynamic
object and execute the actual term
level function at native speeds.
As long as you don't have any skolems
in your input, and skolems are basically
unknown at the current — in the current
part of program, it's an unknown variable.
And if you don't have any of those
in your inputs, then we could
do this dynamic linking thing.
So it wouldn't cover everything,
but it would be a possible speedup.
And that's what basically
Template Haskell does currently.
Because Template Haskell, if you're
using some function, of course it
needs to have some shared object,
it loads it, and then every — so
for example, makeLenses.
If — when you run it, the generator
for your lenses, it runs at
native speeds on your machine.
And we are basically looking towards
making this integration seamless.
So instead of writing like Template
Haskell splices, and working
on the meta level where you
are producing ASTs from values.
So you get values as input,
but you're producing ASTs.
We are like removing this unnecessary
abstraction barrier and we are
producing values from values.
Or types from types.
And the hope is that it will have the
ergonomics of term level of programming,
the performance of term level programming,
but integrated with the type checker.
>> That all sounds really promising.
And I can definitely empathize with
some of the problems that you've
expressed about type level programming.
Just in the last episode, my
coworker, Cameron, and I were
talking about our tech stack.
And one of the tools that we use is
Servant to implement our HTTP server.
And I think Servant is kind of
a poster child for something
that's doing — something that's
approaching dependent Haskell.
Using all of these kind
of weird approaches, type
families and stuff like that.
And we've actually run into some of those
problems where either it requires too
many resources, whether that's CPU time
or RAM or whatever, or it's accidentally
quadratic in, you know, the number of
routes we have or something like that.
And they've been
challenging to work around.
So I can appreciate that a complicated
effort, like dependent Haskell, could
make that type of programming easier
and more ergonomic in the future.
So I look forward to that.
>> Yes.
So Servant is a great example.
It's a library I absolutely love,
and I use it whenever possible.
And as long as I have not too many
endpoints, it works beautifully.
But like it starts to get slower
when you get more endpoints.
And there is nothing
wrong with the library.
It's just that GHC doesn't have
the facilities to implement this
wonderful type level approach
in a more direct manner.
And I hope that with dependent
types, this will be a solved issue.
>> Yeah, I hope so too.
It would make our development life easier.
Okay, well, that was the last thing
that I wanted to loop back on.
So I'll throw it back to you, Vlad.
Anything else that you
wanted to talk about?
>> Well, I guess I will just abuse this
platform to say that I'm learning German.
So if anyone wants to help me, please do.
>> Maybe they can trade,
they'll teach you German and you
can teach them some GHC development.
>> That's definitely
a trade I would do.
>> All right.
Cool.
Well, thank you so much for
being on the show, Vlad.
It's been a pleasure talking with you
about dependent Haskell and everything
else related to GHC development.
I hope you had a good time.
>> I definitely had, and,
thank you for having me.
So I'll do my best not to
disappoint with dependent types.
Yeah, so I guess, bye everyone.
>> Oh, before you go, actually.
If people want to find you online,
where should they look for you?
>> So I open Twitter daily,
unfortunately.
So you can find me there.
>> All right.
And I think your handle is @int_index.
We'll put a link to it in
the show notes, but yeah.
Unfortunately I feel that, with Twitter.
>> Yeah.
Find me there.
>> All right.
Well, thanks again, Vlad.
Thanks for being on the show.
>> Thank you.
Bye.
>> Thanks for listening
to the Haskell Weekly podcast.
I've been your host Taylor Fausak.
And with me today was special
guest Vladislav Zavialov.
If you want to find out more
about the podcast, please visit
our website, HaskellWeekly.News.
This week we're brought to
you by our employer, ITProTV,
an ACI Learning company.
They would like to offer you 30% off the
lifetime of your subscription by using the
promo code HaskellWeekly30 at checkout.
Head over to ITPro.TV to get
started today, and use promo code
HaskellWeekly30 at checkout to get 30%
off the lifetime of your subscription.
Thanks again for listening
and we'll see you next week.